a federal appeals court in California is
hearing a lawsuit filed by a group of
activists which accuses Joe Biden and
his administration of complicity in
Israel's genocide in Gaza now panel of
Judges will hear arguments from
Palestinian human rights groups who say
Biden along with his secretaries of
state and defense have failed to prevent
the war and are providing support to
Israel this case was dismissed in
January but judges are now hearing an
appeal against that earlier decision
well for more on all of this Rob joins
us now from outside the court in San
Francisco Rob can you just outline
exactly what this case is actually all
about and what the arguments are on both
sides
here right well the this case goes back
some months and was argued before a
lower court in January at that time the
uh plaintiffs representing uh several
human rights organizations and
Palestinian legal uh organizations argu
that the United States and particularly
President Biden secretary of state
blinkin Secretary of Defense a Austin uh
Austin were in violation of various us
laws and treaties that prohibited the
aiding and abetting genocide the judge
in that case heard the uh the arguments
and later issued a ruling saying that
while he found that there was uh a
factual basis for the claims of genocide
and ab betting genocide
on behalf of the on the part of the
United States government uh he could not
uh accept the case for jurisdictional
reasons that is that there is a uh
Doctrine in American legal law saying
that judges cannot um uh counterman
political Decisions by the executive
branch and he said that this cons was
considered a a political decision the uh
plaintiffs then appealed that to the uh
uh ninth circuit uh court of appeals
here in San Francisco where they argued
today
uh that this was not in fact a political
decision in the sense of whether a
certain political uh or foreign policy
matter was correct or incorrect or wise
or unwise but rather that this was a
matter simply of law that there is a law
and are international treaties that the
United States is pledged to adhere to
and that the courts do in fact have a
role in enforcing uh the law and so the
judges uh did seem somewhat skeptical of
this one judge saying well you were
asking us basically to interfere in
every aspect of US military uh uh
operations overseas and what weapons can
be used uh and sent to allies Etc uh but
the the judges having heard all of this
they've retired now they'll probably
issue a a um a ruling but probably the
close the the soonest they would would
be a week or two I'd like to introduce
now one of the
uh people involved in this in in this
this is Ahmed Abu F Ahmed please stand
right here uh thank you very much you
you represent Al Haw which is a
Palestinian legal and human rights
organization um if you could recap what
the uh arguments are before the US
Judiciary here uh on behalf of uh a case
that making a case that that genocide is
being committed in the US is implicit
complicit no absolutely as as you said
the our case Bas basically says that the
uh Biden Administration specifically
three defendants President Biden secary
of State Lincoln and Secretary of
Defense Austin are complicit in this
genocide and uh are uh failing their
duty to prevent genocide from taking
place so there are two uh um issues that
are at stake here us complicity and it's
failure to prevent the genocide that is
taking place uh this is the uh appeal
hearing in the previous hearing um I
think it was a historical moment for the
first time we have the Palestinian
people narrating their own struggle
drawing on their experiences of NBA on
what their grandparents experienced in
1948 being ethnically cleansed from
their ancestoral land and their
indigenous uh uh land for the first time
also we heard from the Palestinians
themselves not only about the
Palestinians so I think the importance
of this case is that the Palestinian
have been speaking directly to the
American people through their Democratic
institutions through their Judiciary
narrating what they're uh uh going
through so for the first time um um we
hear from the Palestinians not only
about them which I think it's one of the
many sins of us uh uh policy towards uh
Palestine and Israel that always listens
to what the Israelis are saying and it's
it's always a distorted uh uh Virgin of
of reality and now yes yes excuse me for
interrupting you but I wanted to before
our time is up uh you also have a a
close personal stake or connection or
tragedy yourself involved in this in so
far as you have relatives in Gaza who
have lost their lives can you tell us a
little about that yes so I I I was born
and raised in Gaza I spent the first 25
years uh of my life in Gaza um uh since
the beginning of this genocide I lost
over 82 members of of my family that's
that also was part of my testimony so I
was involved in this case as a
representative of alhak one of the
organizations that took this place to
court but also as a legal expert and as
an individual that suffered harm from uh
uh this genocide and I think the the
first hearing um um was very uh
promising the the the judge heard all
the testimonies allowed all the
testimonies but unfortunately ruled uh
um against dismissed the case based on
the BL
uh Doctrine which you just mentioned
that the Judiciary cannot tell the
executive branch how to decide on
matters of foreign policy while this is
true what we're saying here that the
Judiciary should we're not asking the
Judiciary to decide on a for policy
matter but on a legal matter the US
Administration is in violation of its
International legal obligations under
the genocide convention but also in
violations of uh US law So what at stake
now and I think the importance of this
case is what does this system entail
here in the US we we've always heard
that the US system and the US democracy
is built on this idea of chicks and
bances if the Judiciary cannot hold the
executive branch uh um accountable when
they're violating International and us
laws then what does that mean for the
whole system so I think this is a
challenge to American democracy thank
you very much we'll have to leave it
there Ahmed Abu Abu from alhak in the
Palestinian human rights organization so
as I mentioned the uh decision of this
court this uh appeals court will
probably not come immediately but we
will be monitoring the uh case as it
proceeds through the US system and
unprecedented as uh Mr Abu F said an
unprecedented opportunity for
Palestinians to give their own testimony
in the US courts back to you okay thanks
so much Rob for all of that that's Rob
Reynolds for us outside the courton San
Francisco make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer